# Arduino MIDI instrument project
This is a basic MIDI instrument that I made for fun. It consists of a 4x4 button matrix, and a 10k potentiometer. The potentiometer is for adjusting the octave, and the buttons are the actual keys. Should the key/octave combination go out of range for MIDI, it will play nothing.

## How it works
The button matrix is first scanned horizontally by pulling each row high and then in each row, the individual columns are read. If a particular column reads high, that specific row/column combination, and thus, that specific button, is being pressed. This check is done at a fixed interval for stability (I sometimes got double inputs when I had only pressed the button once), I chose 100ms. These readings are then recorded in a 2-dimensional array and a 16-bit number, where the first 4 (least significant) bits are row 0, with the least significant bit of those being column 0, and the last 4 (most significant) bits are row 3, with the most significant of those being column 3. Thus, I did not use the 2-dimensional array, at all, because the 16-bit number was more efficient for serial transfer.

After the matrix is read, the potentiometer is read. The board I'm using goes from 0 to 1023 when reading up to 5V analog, and since MIDI allows for up to 10 octaves, I chose to divide the reading by 100 to get 10 possible integer values.

Then, if there were any changes in the button state (not counting the potentiometer), the data packet is constructed. First byte sent is 0xFF as a magic number, then upper 8 bits of the 16-bit button state number, then the lower 8 bits of that number, then a single byte indicating the octave, and a magic 0x00 byte.

Since my board was not compatible with the USBMidi library, I had to send this data via serial communication, to be interpreted by an interfacing program I made in C# that maps the buttons and octave to MIDI notes using the WetMidi library. I created a virtual MIDI device using loopMIDI, then hooked the program to that device, and had the program send MIDI commands based on the data received from the physical board. This could then be read by any program. I tested it using FL Studio Demo, and was able to hook up the device to the DAW and play any instrument without issues.

## Possible improvements
- **Get a lower resistance button matrix or make my own:** The buttons I used had such high resistance that I couldn't press more than 2 buttons on the same row at the same time. When pressing the 3rd, the board would read low. Upon testing with an LED, the LED lowered its brightness in response to the third button. This confirmed that the buttons' resistance was just intolerably high. Even pulling the outputs to ground with a 100k resistor didn't work. It used to be that I couldn't press more than one button in the same row, though, and adding 10k resistors fixed it, so that's an improvement I guess. In theory, the programs presented here support pressing all 16 buttons at the same time.
- **Better magic number implementation:** I don't know if I need the magic numbers, I simply added them for stability. I don't know if I implemented them correctly, since my current implementation for the interfacing program waits until it reads the first magic number before it starts interpreting the packet it received, which means it can ignore a 16-button press. It wasn't a problem for this hobby project because I don't expect anyone to have 16 fingers or a way to reliably press all 16 buttons. Not like the button matrix I used allows that, anyway.
